Large crowds can be dangerous places to be. When we think of disasters, shipwreaks and airliner crashes jump to mind, but human crushes can be equally deadly. One example in recent history is the 2015 Hajj stampede in Mecca, which reputable news agencies agree killed over 2,000 people - more than the sinking of the Titanic. Historically, such crushes have often been caused or aggrevated by poor design of public spaces - the absence of crush barriers, corridors that are too narrow, or streets which cause large groups of people to collide headlong are some errors which can and have led to catastrophe.

Enter computation. Modern designers and architects use crowd simulation software, which can emulate the behaviour of thousands of pedestrians in a 3D model of a building or public space. One might think that this software would be limited in its utility, since simulating the human brain is not even close to feasible with current technology. However, it transpires that humans in crowds are very predictable, making crowd simulation a reliable way of determining how a crowd might behave in a space before it is even built. Indeed, at high densities, crowds can behave more like fluids than groups of people - and the computer simulation of fluids is a heavily studied field in its own right.

One particular application of crowd simulation that has proved very effective is in simulating the behaviour of crowds in stadiums. Historically, stadia have been the venues for some of the worse crushes and crowd collapses - while the Hillsborough disaster is the most well known, there are many other examples. Architects can now determine in what manner and how quickly a stadia will be evacuated before the first concrete is poured. Money can be saved when this knowledge can be gleaned earlier rather than later in the design process, so it is easy to see why such software has become popular. Another economic reason for the use of such software is that simulation can help find the most profitable places to position concessions stands and advertisments. However, the safety benefits of this technology should not be downplayed. Modern stadia are far safer than their forebearers because of this scientific, empirically led approach to design.
